[Music]
Exactly I was thinking that maybe the
waves wanted to comment on something okay so I
mean I got
involved and it seems that we have started
off and we had the presentation
that
enri are you going to put it up are you going to take care of it
or how do we do it let's see also the
presentation
and I'll put it up now I'm sharing yes it goes a
little bit for that thing of everything being very
visual
not everything very
well enr no I don't know if you
wanted what
Cool tell me when you want me to change and that's it
okay the only thing is that maybe clear
full screen well it doesn't matter No
because that's how we can see it ig well it's fine as it's fine
perfect okay I'm
sharing I don't know exactly how
you see it perfect
thanks thanks to you I take this opportunity
to say thank you
no in fact I wanted to start
Thanking Enrique for this space
where we are going to try to think together and
where it is a pleasure to feel
heard by more people who
resonate with the same thing no
and we have been talking a lot these days
about what we were going to talk about what we
were going to think about how we wanted to say it  that's how
this presentation is
and we decided
that we preferred to present
ourselves as critical apprentices
apprentices of open dialogues because
we have met Learning to
use open dialogues in Mental Health
and and I think that we are both quite
critical perhaps we are Well yes as a
critical positioning from different
angles so we like to present ourselves
as
apprentices and we are Lidia Alosa and María
Francisca Mory we are going to talk about
counter-expertise
and and Perhaps Perhaps we are also going to go
a little beyond psychiatry
itself we are not going to extrapolate it as
Lidia has said to what
expertise is and how that is
used so
that we say that it is like a Hello no of
influence of violence and of and of power
and power relations I don't know Lidia do
you want to explain the title a little bit let's
see the title well the thing about counter-
expertise in the end it has to do because
I got involved at one time thinking about the
counterculture movement no and
well it seems that it is true that in
academic circles This is like
thought out in some way about counter-
expertise And such But it didn't have as
much  interest in stopping in the roll
of the concept and all this does not
seem to me to be fair of what in some
way we want to go up no
So in the end it is a position okay in
front of another position in front of well to the
monologues these vertical ones that are
circulating not in this knowledge that is to
say they are monologues there is no dialogue there is no
dialogue and and well it is like that whenever it is
understood that there is a moment a
clinical problem
eh profane It is true that the
word is also theorized within
anthropology and in some
disciplines But I wanted to use it
Simply because it seems to me
that it is dead Or rather that this
knowledge is dead at least it is
dying in the sense that if there is already
questioning then eh They already have the
possibility of dying anyway I am very
optimistic
e but I also think so because I believe that
this universe not that of psychiatry
well the device Yes in general eh is
an
Underworld then Well we are here Well
a little to alter like me as an
altered person Well we are here no if it is
a little to alter the knowledge and
destabilize or at least to
try
and And yes beyond talking about the title
for me
Something we were talking about is that I usually think about when I address someone and I talk about this topic about the topic of well the so-called Mental Health, which I always have in mind, as if they were looking at me out of the corner of their eye in Gamma, the mutual support group that I was in
and and I'm always thinking about
in my colleagues always, I mean, beyond the fact that I
put in too many hours a day
in a paid job, I don't
lose sight of them and I don't usually
position myself as a
professional, of course, I'm ashamed uh of
belonging to to to many services no
and and and having to jump through
that hoop many times that I don't know if I really
pass but well, there we go,
bothering no So in the end there are three
points that we want to
talk about, one is like like that, that we have
there now put not the thing of
vindicating
uh the otherness with a lot of imposture No, that
thing of feeling like
impostors or intruders, which is good, which
is phenomenal. I mean, it would be a good
indicator, no. I mean, imposture of what
Yes, in fact, it is like the word
that calls out the most here, no  the word
imposture because we were talking
many times
about the position that you have to assume,
not one when you are in the system you
observe according to what type of things you are
How to survive How to survive the
system being part of the system not a
little bit of what the companions have started
How to place yourself
there and and I remember that all the times that
we were talking about it
the word cheating came up a lot no HM and yes and
what can be done from the inside from the outside
if from the inside is better if from the
outside if you have to get out
eem and how how we live all that no
how how to inhabit all that because in the
end we did
agree all the time that it
is like a feeling of
exhaustion No I don't know if it is shared
by all the people who
try to see some
change feeling that you are
fighting that when it seems that on one
side eh you manage to advance in
something on the other side suddenly you come
across Well with another wall no and
how that makes you have to be
navigating all the time
eh And receiving from all sides and I
remember that when we were talking
a little about this part of the imposture
Eh yes I remember that we were
reflecting on that
eh you somehow manage to evade
some type of psychiatric violence
eh but then you open that of another type of
social institution and you find
equally
violent institutions institutions that have
supposedly been created to
protect no I mean what we were talking about no it
's for your own good that we love no but if there was one
thing we agreed on when we were
talking when we were reflecting on
this with Lidia it was that this comes from
psychiatry I mean that the issue of
Mental Health Now it turns out that it is
biopsychosocial and it is everywhere and
and what we have realized is that
many many systems
many
structures are created for our good so that we
are well And so that we are cared for
and we are protected and that those same
structures are the ones that continue to
violate the
same people again and again no and and and well that is
what generates the short circuit not the one that
I wish was only in
psychiatry
no but that this is like
expanding to what are the
structures and the institutions at all
levels and and what we found in
common was the  expertise not that
placing yourself at a higher point of
knowledge justified and endorsed by
a lot of things
eh or well that's what they say clear eh
puts you in a position of being
able to decide to have the universal truth
in your power and therefore stop
listening stop listening to others
no I mean no it doesn't matter what
you say is not valid and and we stop a lot to
think about how we lived
these situations not how we felt it
in the body
and And yes I remember that a sensation
that I identified a lot is the
sensation that it never
ends that it never ends that it
seems that one thing seems to be going a
little better but then you open another
door and you find
violence again no
Lidia Yes well I thought that that for
our own good So we dissidents
know that these are all
devices of social control
finally no beyond the language that is
used and how it is sold
in me I usually live in in my
workplace with exel of
variable indicators and and I thought not
as eh as a psychiatric person also
eh how is my body administered not
administered by the administration
eh And in the end eh well well that's not what
matters those indicators those
variables
eh adherence to treatment
awareness of the
disease those techniques those methods eh
the
interpretations the planning
and the diagnosis of course Not as a
gateway eh To that rite of passage
and h
in which it is very difficult very difficult to be
able to get
out very difficult so what
matters well eh the word matters
usually the word of the
expert matters who is the one in charge and it is the
status it is the social position no in the
end in all this that what we were thinking
about the archetype
eh of the expert Well the expert the
archetype of the expert and the archetype of the
crazy one that we are going to see also with
an example
and my friend cirion has worked here on a
tarot card that we were missing which is the
archetype of the expert then said like that I mean well
very simple that the
expert And what is it that he contemplates well smoke
smoke in which he thinks and smoke in which he
sells and a great expert cannot
establish himself Nor survive without his
fart sniffers or so basically this would be
a summary of the archetype of the expert that
in  I think popular culture is
very well understood with this image.
So, well, it's for your own good, it's
always what's there behind it, and
how we experience it in our
bodies. Well, we were talking and saying that
I'm starting to think that this. I mean,
basically, here it's like
rape culture. I mean, to me it
sounds a lot like rape culture.
It's not the psychiatric person's fault,
not the person who has been violated, the person who is being
treated, the person who lives with it.
It's a perforative treatment
that pierces our bodies, that
is, at an oral level,
and the
injections, the voices, the voices of the
experts. Well, in the end, all
that comes out. Not all that dissidence, the one that
can survive and
does well within the system is that
person who gets a paying job
that is a mortgage, who has a family,
a
reputation, their children, the
dog, and the
life insurance or whatever. Well,
everything's fine there, but if you get out, if you are
a foreign body, well, and when I say
foreign, I'm talking about the quir, and
the
[ __ ], well, there we are,
no, the
problem, and in the
end. Well, it's always that thing that  we
have
some people when in some
spaces not that we do not come out of the closet
no but we do not openly say that
we are psychiatric because if not
eh the other part is that it seems that we
have to show that we are people
with whom
[Music] you
can feel
safe s I was
thinking that now Enri has passed us the
arcane that we love the arcane I don't know
if we can see it again it's that when we
were talking about this arcane that
is all very thought out that we
are all the same, we all think the same, we all dress the same, we all work, we
all do the same because if we
stop being how they want us to
be then they label us and we
enter the circuit of violence and
this also this also happens when you
are working and and at work you
disagree no
or you have to quickly return to balance
eh And a and to remain
silent because if not then
labels quickly emerge arise
of well it is that it is not it is not
very well to really have problems no
how dissent is invalidated by by
system and when we were talking about
the arcane
that Lidia tells me Well and what color do we
put on it  background no and I told him
Well, I think we have to put
blue in the background and no because no, not
sky blue but blue because I remember
when I was in
college finishing psychology and and
already starting to plan the professional practice
uh a few classmates were
thinking about how they would make the
professional cards and such because before there
weren't so many social networks there were more
cards
and and I remember a classmate who told me no no no
no the card has to be
the color blue because heat the color
blue
elegance confidence and
seriousness so of course I said there well
nothing or rather the expert has to
have blue
somewhere No because if not no it doesn't inspire
confidence suppose To what extent everything down to
any small detail is
organized around these languages
no Well in the end the representation
basically summarizes that the archetype of the
expert is someone who is dedicated to pontificating
basically is someone who sets himself up as if
he knows no and in the end it
is tremendous because I mean the
tentacles that it reaches is that it creates
everything a whole army
of not propagation and consumption of
marketing arguments And I'm
thinking about that in the typical advertisement
of  toothpaste that says how it is
scientifically proven well there
you know if it is that there well of course you are going to
answer something that is scientifically
proven not this that has evidence that
although or rather it is like like the
key words not in which uh if I say this I
will suddenly have credibility
Notice that I was thinking about the skunk it is an
animal that expels its fetid eh
when it feels threatened and we
also talked about that sisca because many
times
and yes we retreated with
more technical language no I mean that that that that there is
behind or rather that that need That that yes we have
that need and I was
remembering
Marcos
an he was a gentleman a Spanish poet
repress in the republic who died
a few years ago
and he was one of the people who served the longest
sentence during the Franco regime no and and I remember
once listening to him a few years
before he died and he said that the most the
most complicated thing was to speak in
simple language and and no longer so that
everyone could understand you it was
like the most annoying thing no because in the
end we go um it
is that it is  very difficult and and and there I
think How how difficult it is
for me too when I think about that I
want to learn how to do easy reading
no I mean how How can we speak or or
that also certain obsession that
some of us may have that it is not so much uh
[Music] being
able to speak many languages ​​or being able to
communicate in the best way but rather that
we are understood just as we want to be
understood no And how to do it in
a very
simple language anyway let's end not
with the With this of the expert or rather
basically it is the Incarnation not of
positivist fundamentalism it is the author of the
name it is and the authorship
no uh He was not thinking about the in in the
diagnosis I think that in the matter of the name I am not
going to get tangled up better not it is one of the
things that I like the most to get tangled up with the
subject of the name you already know that I
dedicated the whole subject of the
family my ghosts of origin to
talk about the names and
go on no but well yes That I say again
the diagnosis is the gateway to
a Rite to a rite of passage and and it can
condemn you to all ostracism  social that there is is
and it is a word that can
dehumanize because it is not used as
a label that does not
have it is it is I don't
know right now but I mean I
think there is a certain strategy
behind it I don't know I don't know if if right now
I'm explaining myself well but I think it is
part of everything of the whole
device the device does not exist in
the DSM
H diagnosis yes And as the diagnosis is also
used in entities outside of psychiatry
also to justify according to What
type of decisions No now
one of the
last decisions that I had to
witness comes to mind a little bit and that and that in some way
I'm trying to compensate Well
cheating as it can't be any other
way eh Like the fact that
someone someone had given one
or two diagnoses to a specific person
eh also
in a way well had had
given two diagnoses to a
specific person And that took away their right to
access a service that at that time
perhaps could be good for them because they were
in a situation of
quite important social protection in terms of
housing and the fact of having two
diagnostic labels made that  some way
and it was already assumed that they would be
people with problems of coexistence
with that would generate difficulties and that
therefore they had to be denied the
option of access to a service that they
needed and that and all of that is
embodied in two little words, that is, in a
diagnostic label. And I also
remember
that
this specific person who has that
diagnostic label uh and is currently
living in a service where I
work and that is a service in which we do not
allow these
labels
and and we have been living
with this
person for quite some time without their labels only with
the person with with her that's it
and and I remember the look of surprise on
my colleagues' faces when
I told them well, the exclusion of
this person from a service because it was
presumed
violence and they had been assigned
a diagnosis. So these
people who are working with me
uh who had lived with this person for more than a month
could not
relate the diagnosis with the
person with whom they were living. I
mean, they did not see, they did
not understand the label.  diagnosis and And
of course what they understood the least
was the the presupposing violence no
because when you had been
living day to day with a person for more than a month and going
through breakdowns and going through
complex situations because they were
suffering Well, they have a
pretty heavy backpack, a story that now we
are going to talk about, of memory and of the
history that is made invisible with the
diagnosis no but well this person
has a very heavy backpack
sometimes they have breakdowns and for that reason and for that reason they
need a little bit they are there with
us no but in more than a month we
had not managed to identify anything of
what was argued to prohibit them
access to the
service they were simply the two
labels that justified everything no and
And how do you remain as a person
who sees it and you are deconstructing yourself
God you are deconstructing yourself and that and that you have to
live with that
because in the end that is the system and you
can make your little pebble
but you cannot carry the whole wall and
the impotence no well in the
asylum is that everything turns around and I
say
mental hospital deliberately because
that thing about acute units and all the
words they've given them, it wouldn't be like
I'm thinking that whitening
isn't the right word either. Maybe perhaps
not. But well, I don't know if I'm
explaining myself
[Music]
and I don't know to what extent
in people who are in
psychiatric hospitals we have like a
discourse we have thought not
in whether In what way or rather our
way of embodying that it could be not of
embodying violence maybe it
responds more to a certain self-defense no I'm
thinking and also
and no because because there's always like that
discourse no that we are
violent people there is very little talk about that we are
violated but there is a lot of talk that we
can be violent
no and and I've been thinking about
self-defense for a few days no I mean
what what is that or rather what is the
story What is the narrative that we
can make from pride
like now after it's the turn of
the Compas of the crazy pride
Madrid Well I don't know I don't know if they
will catch on if they have planned to talk
a little about this
but but it doesn't matter  It's that I mean I mean it doesn't matter if
you talk about the
percentage, not the percentage, it's already
known that the same proportion of
violent people would be among
psychiatric people and those who are are
undiagnosed, not a mind. Well, I do
n't
really know. And if we really have to
prove something, no. I mean, I think we have too much,
not
with con icio and with the claim of the
memory of history, of our own
history, and now, speaking in this of
memory, not of the archetype of madness,
eem, I thought. And it's that in the tarot card it also
happens, not in the archetype of
madness, it is the
ungovernable being as well and it is a being that is
always in movement
and it is an archetype in which, well, the
truth is, the authentic is always
present and,
well, when people wear a white coat,
that is usually quite far away. No. I
mean, the other way around, what usually
exists are those therapies that
remind me more of conversion therapies.
Well, they do it with trans people and they have
done it also with other people,
other dissidents,
no,
and in that of thinking that what, what
archetype of madness
sisca these days I was talking about
something that in recent months
has become increasingly
clear to me that it has to do with emancipating oneself
from many
environments, okay, I mean, it's true that I want the
archetype of madness that I have to
be
eh something that is emancipated from everything
that is not
safe and that in the end it is a Liberation,
not because when you are in environments that are
not safe, in which you do not
feel accompanied or supported or think
that you are not being
listened to, it is much
easier to have a bad time, not have a bad time, bad
I say have a bad time because you
can suffer a lot, it can hurt
extremely, and then it can also be
embodied, not in those less
usual forms that are frowned upon
by the SOE, not by the
progress professionals. I mean, this
is something that I also always
find, not like the good ones, the
good professionals. It's true that they usually show that
certain sensitivity to the person who
is having a very bad time, not to the person who
is embodying very
extreme pain, but maintaining the
narrative of
madness is not accepted, it is not
ASSUMED, no, in the end it is, it's
that  It's another the
unusual experiences are other dissidences are
other the madness
is I think it's like like a
manifestation eh radical of certain
fractures but also like a
totally extreme corporal experience
no and it can't be
allowed it seems like it can't be
allowed no So it was that the turns
not like emancipating ourselves from those
fragile environments and and that the voices
are awake not that we defend
from our life stories from
orality as well No the truth is that
I have learned a lot with my companions who
write but as I always have that
certain need that not that to be
heard not that I don't want to
write an article to position myself
and achieve a certain status so that I can be
heard but I would like that right
now an
attempt would be made to pay a minimum of attention
not that it would give me the legitimacy that I
understand that we can have for
often embodying madness not to
say that when I talk about
awake work I am thinking about that we
have to name ourselves okay that we have to
conquer that space of the name and and
that it seems to me that it is
eh the only way out you know of
authority this  that we are
not really named and it is the name the
diagnosis is the suit it is a
definitive suit on the
body no enri I think you've gone too far
eh I mean we are still on the subject of
memory
excuse me no because we were talking
with yes about this not about our
stories
and and we still have we have
a little bit left no because
I mean here it was like the moment that I
wanted to take advantage of what
being in a Gan has meant for me of
the learning experience and of
emancipation or at least
eh I'm not saying that it is total or anything like that
no but I
think that
the key within the pride movement can be in the mutual support I
mean to continue is that it can be it is
difficult it is difficult not to maintain
relationships many times
but but I think that continuing a little there and
and also yes just one little thing that
I had with respect to this
organization of the movement not in all
social movements there is an elite
I mean the elite that speaks and
here I want to recognize myself because I
feel like a privileged person who
can speak and and I think about all the
people I know who are
eh prisoners of psychiatric drugs
imprisoned in the
devices imprisoned in her
family okay I think about those people how
hard it is no
what happens with the G
sisca
happens happens that well as with everything that is
war is war
because I have also been lucky enough to
belong to a mutual support group
in a very critical moment in my
life no not even that they existed but from the
first moment I knew that I had to
connect with people who had gone through the
same thing as me or something very similar
and I didn't find any no and
and well And in the end you create the
spaces and what happens with the gam is that
well it seems that it is a piece of the
market now too and I am
experiencing it very badly
because the mutual support groups are
spaces where it is supposed that there should not
be a professional figure that there should
only be people who
share a
situation and who are there from the
horizontality
to share themselves to give veracity
to those silenced stories and to
find those points of connection that
are so
healthy no and and suddenly and
suddenly I realize
that well now the new fashion is that
in a mutual support group there has to
be a
professional for our own
good and it is a struggle Well
[Music]
well no  I know what to call it because in the
end I can maintain what is the range
to which I belong so that no
professional enters but of course how do I
achieve it? Well, I achieve it with my little
label
with my little title okay because if I didn't have
my little label title I couldn't
maintain that safe space Although
later in that mutual help group
I don't have any little title in that mutual
help group I am a sister in Grief and I am
nothing more
But it is the way that I have found
to prevent the
professionals from entering and
yes now I connect a little with what
the previous colleagues have said
not from the previous presentation or the
previous talk that sometimes you have to
disassociate no and
I have seen myself very reflected in that I have
had to disassociate myself from some
entities in which gams were distributed
with professionals
there for our own
good no matter what happens Alo and they
destabilize us by distorting and that and that
I was experiencing it as if it was an
appropriation of our stories as a
like a robbery or rather as I have few
spaces that are  mine or that they are that they
are our own and and it's not going
well for you either, I mean you also have to
usurp it from me no you also have to be there
listening and preventing
the dynamics that are generated
when there is no one to
listen and and she experienced it with surprise and
anger But but well the truth is
that this paternalism is there
and and and I wouldn't say that it is paternalism
but rather I would say that it already appropriates
our experiences to create a
business environment in which it is
sustained with with with with this logo not of It is
for your own good it is so that you can go through
the Grief better so that it does not become chronic
because Of course if there is no professional
the Grief becomes chronic This is very
clear that the Grief becomes chronic if there is
no professional there who even if they
only listen it does not matter No and
we were a little with that no that in
some way we continue eliminating
stories we continue
signaling and we continue with the
power relations because not even
a space where I can
supposedly share My story with
people who are in the same situation as
me,
well there has to be someone
listening and that takes a little  what
we have talked about that
a kind of Alo of
skunk language has been created not that there can be
danger if we are not controlled in some
way or if we are not and I remember an
anecdote uh that the first times that
I was doing the mutual aid groups
here where I live it was like
everything was very I mean there was no it was not like very
transgressive and such I remember that several
professionals from different
fields asked me to be present
to
learn and I said wow we are in terrible shape
Because that means that they don't listen No
because if you wanted to learn you would listen
to the people who talk to you and who
tell you their stories because what
happens in a game is simply that is that
stories are told and they are listened to No
So it's like I was saying but what are you going to
but I don't know it's like a short circuit
and and well and there we are not the
well-being business the business It's for your own good
sisca and and also of course it came to me
also with the issue of the
discontinuation of the drugs that
is also incredible or rather because or rather it is
fair from the stories Not from
what is left  counting and for the
psychiatric people who have had
that experience not of discontinuation and
suddenly there are also a lot of
super expert professionals I mean a
lot there are not many I wish there were
more the story is Who are you addressing are you
addressing your colleagues Or
are you Eh addressing society as an
expert Who are you addressing no and And that is
what generates a little bit of discomfort for me
or the issue of
Human Rights No well it is that yes or I mean of
course not that in this world it is
good to talk about Human Rights
but Who to whom are you addressing to
talk to them about human rights or I mean well I do
n't know if it would be nice for
their own voices to be heard with that
noo and of course right Here yes enri you can
go in now we are finishing
[Music]
and yes I think that well I don't know it
seems to me that with what they have told us
eh Hello yaas
or I don't know I don't know the truth is that it is something that I don't I do
n't know how to answer or I mean
usually many times I think no
and sometimes I say Well come on
if we are going to continue with the trap no of
those we raise our voices within the
institutions that are
silencing us Well in the
institutions that are ultimately for
control
no more than that they are erected in another
way and
then we also ask ourselves why we have
presented ourselves as apprentices in
open dialogues
and the practice of open dialogues
guarantees radical respect for madness
no
eh That is a question that was launched at
some point H I would really like to take
up again with the people who were there
the question at what point are they
no I mean that that could
be HM it
seems to me that it is look that I had
like a certain guarantee that
open dialogues worked well when it
looked like a
gam
yes it was like yes like something like it
looks like a gam it works well because the only
way to
validate is by really listening
no but
really listening to
everything Yes and also that the practice
of
total consent I don't want to talk because I don't want to talk
and and it's not that I need to be helped because
you think that I need I have the need to be
helped it's that I
don't want to change I don't want the other
person Yes yes Well in the end eh we also
had the question that with What
language do we  we dare
No, well, hopefully we can uncancel
all that language of madness, we
can uncancel
everything, de-assimilate, not de-
psychoeducate, decolonize ourselves from everything, it is
imperative, I don't agree, and hopefully we also
practice easy reading,
and there we were with that thing about what
we fantasize about, also, no, because to
change imaginaries you have to fantasize and you have to rave,
and what do you fantasize about,
sisca? I fantasize a
lot, I fantasize that we will
be
more and more, I fantasize that
stories will be recovered, contexts will be recovered,
diagnoses will be eliminated, and that the gowns won't have
so much
power that they can't
silence me, that they can't
invalidate me, and that we will find more spaces
for listening in all areas because
in the workplace too, when there is
a problem, I don't know, now one
brings everything to what one is living in
the present moment, no, and now it comes to me
as if the most
critical moments that I have lived, the feeling
of not being heard and not being understood
by the person in
front of me is one of the most  violent that
I have
never had no and And yes I began to
study open dialogues
precisely because I
believe that they precisely give space to
dialogues to listening to listening
to everything and And yes I also remember that
when we were reflecting on this
part we said that
open dialogues are a
tool that allows for
listening but that in the end what there are are
people who listen and that it will depend a
lot on the
person who uses that tool how they
use it with whom
eh Because in fact it is a
very nice tool but if the person who uses it
USES it simply as a technique for
change a technique to obtain I don't
know no that there it depends a lot
on what I fantasize about is not a
technique I fantasize about people who
want to be different and who
want to add on the other side and who
fall less too and you who fall
less I or I mean it's clear I dream about
the end of the expert reputation and above
all
with the end also that madness
and extreme discomfort is a
violated and
violated language I fantasize a lot about
that and And well then before It's true that
maybe we have eaten a  a little bit of
time we have 10 minutes left but but I did
want to finish enri if you want
put the last slide in case someone
wants to keep in touch
and and well we had there I feel like reading
something that we had put as if to
finish not like continuing with the
question of what we fantasize about
And I said like that well stop giving
answers
think that the solutions are not
capital move away from that of the
sentence and from the words that are
chewed
definitive some wishes like that
Fridays stop with radial balls that we
stop serving fires and blowing
hurricanes that the shadows always
change shape and we make
the earth fertile territory again And if you still can't keep going around in circles
How to
say in the most subtle elegant and
violent way that the institution kills and
crazy people don't give up and and we don't
postpone thank you thank you
And thank you again in for for the for
being the Technological of because we are not
very technological the truth thanks
to
you did you like the skunk in the end
Enrique you were you were scared shitless
eh
eh I'm more scared
now  I say with the G of Athena in my
heart they're going to sell you everything in these
G If we don't go with the ammunition ready I
really say it with all the love
for the one who's going to speak to us from asylum
magazine the political asylum the
mental asylum because we feel so so violated
what you have expressed a place that
should be to be
protected and nothing I say it because we're going to
switch to English it's a magazine it's a
magazine it's a non-explosive charge they are
bullets they are words It's true what
hurts Well nothing well a
pleasure a real pleasure I give way to
everyone to everyone who wants to ask we have
time
please yes we have a few minutes if anyone
feels like it Well great because in the
end we put the
questions a bit to question
no In case someone
could have been asking them I
also would have loved for Jordi to
ask us some questions no because we just
ended up I just realized that I must have
loved it Yes I thought the same thing I
thought the same thing
Honestly yes Well okay okay okay
we don't have to be I don't know
okay I ask you whatever you
want  to really take a step you have
left something in the
inkwell Well to me I do have to
say that I I do I mean it's true that it's
quite hard for me to stop No but I
can do it but I fantasize I
also fantasize a lot about putting on a
song that I'm not going to put it but in case
anyone feels like it I'm going to put it here
so that it ends not for them to listen to it
at home if they feel like it no And also
For me it was
inspiring for this song I'm
not putting it here it's called theories of
another
World it's by stop l So a little bit
of pachanga metal and wonder to
finish thanks good recommendation
Of course I'll
put it for everyone ask
enes and I think that more or less the
duration corresponds with the time that's
left eh more or
less that I think that whatever you feel like
no I don't know if I ever sent it to you enri
I think I've sent you others Like that a
little
more more corny maybe but I don't know if I
'll send this to you at some point
if you feel like it Of course yes man
of course I
like it it's softer than everything that  I
was studying studying
listening last night a little
softer
come on well thank you very much Yes I'm going
to read what Enrique is saying
that I need to
thank everyone present and absent
as well and
that we continue and also and yes
above all the thanks that I have
felt super supported it is worth as much for
Enrique as she
is also and Saso they were there first
and now after that there is the
crazy pride Madrid So we left the best
for last that is it is
not that now it is still
crazy pride Sorry Fatima it's you and
Edel too thank you thank you
Hello how are you I'm going to let
Fatima speak first she is the one who is
in crazy pride I am not in
crazy pride but then I will do
my presentation
for
okay
Hello Hello Fatima thanks to both of you
everyone Hello Well then Hello Thank you very much
for organizing these sessions and
for all the hard work of organization
that it must have been and to be honest I am
very excited and it is an
honor to be alongside groups like
Mind freedom or the people from ailum who I
am also registered with in the
magazine and  I receive it every month, well every
three months and nothing. I am Fatima, I am
part of the collective orgullo loo Madrid,
which is a collective of
psychiatric people who are activists
in the city of Madrid. Well, and in the
community of Madrid. And I'm going to give a
talk, I'm going to give a presentation.
Okay, I don't know, let's see if I'm good at it.
This is okay.
And okay,
well,
and I can be heard,
right? Yes, I can be heard and I see the
presentation. If necessary, send it to me
because it has happened on other
occasions that they ask me to do it so that they can
see it full screen. If it's not
necessary, I don't do it. Okay, well, go ahead, so what
happens is, let's see, okay, so
what happens is that I
see us, but well, I don't try to
do it like that either. Okay, well, I'm going to talk about
psychiatrization in the Spanish state
and first of all, well, the
electrifications of the Spanish state, to
begin with, are based on what would be the
Mental Health system, of everything that
is the public system, which is usually given
in hospitals in acute wards, then there
are several courses that would be the
medium-stay wards, which would be
admissions of about 6 months or so, and
then long-stay wards.  that there are people
who have been admitted to
these types of resources for years and decades and they have no
way of getting out
or the way out is very very difficult
because as there are no
homes or centers to begin with where they
can return to what would be a
life after a lifetime of being
institutionalized it is almost impossible for them to get
out and then there is also a couple
that is the entire psychiatrization of what
is the private health system as well
that is also functioning in
the Spanish state I do not know if the
colleagues I have not been able to be before and I do not
know if they have spoken at all about the
situation of the Mental Health system
in Spain But well if I repeat myself whatever it
is you tell me and I am going to start by
saying that it is exactly the
psychiatrization that is the result of
applying the biomedical model that tries to
impose the hypothesis that insanity and
psychic suffering are a
mental illness and that said illness
is and can be treated like any other
the consequences of this model
first It would be for all the people that we are that we have
been
psychiatric is to condemn ourselves to a
chronicity with some medications
many times for life and  with
diagnoses that place us on a
lower scale than what could be
said of good of taking away and
depriving us of rights and then on the other
hand what this model achieves is to
individualize what would be the
causes of the conditions On the one
hand, the living conditions or
the oppressions not I mean for example
when a person commits suicide because of a
decision they say it's because something is wrong
with their brain when the reality is that
what is wrong is obviously this
system no and well all of this the I mean what would be
psychiatrization would be the whole
process and when we say a person is
psychiatric from the moment
you make contact with a doctor or a
psychiatrist or even before and now all
any type of psychic suffering that you
have or madness that you have is
understood as an illness that is
part of the brain that's why in the
crazy movement we say that it's not a
chemical imbalance but rather an
imbalance of power and Well where
we come from est son Vallejo nera who well you
already know a military doctor and
López Ibor Valle jera during the
Franco regime did or rather  He had a whole
theory about the Red Gene by which
Marxists were
considered sick and I'm also going to
read here that they had
degenerative temperaments, mediocre intelligences and
innately revolutionary social personalities
and well all this from
Valle Joner yes it is true that later
his thought did not have a subsequent school
but at the time it served
among other things to justify the
theft of babies to pathologize all the
dissidences
both political and sexual etcetera
yes well one hundred sexual would also be
political and then López Ibor who was a
psychiatrist also during the
regime but he was more of the Opus Dei wing in
fact they were both contrary I'm
only giving a brushstroke about
them and for everything that is the history of
psychiatry I highly recommend the work
of Ricardo Campos Well I'll leave it there and
López Ibor was more I mean he was a
very Catholic Opus Dei person whose
work was based above all on
biologism which is a bit like again that
mental illness is genetic it
's hereditary etcetera etcetera and
during his years and years as a psychiatrist he
carried out  electroshocks to
sexual dissidents and today there is a
clinic with his name which is also a
clinic that costs quite a bit in
which one of the floors which is the fifth
floor costs 500 a day worth to
give us an idea and where
famous people usually go here and such And then it
has other floors where it is covered either by
private insurance or it is done
privately And that clinic has or
rather is located on a street that has
the name of Lopez Ibor is not supposed to be
that clinic is a reference of what
psychiatry should be, let's say what
well-being would be but it has
in that in that clinic they continue to give
electroshocks and in that clinic they continue to tie
people up in fact they have a
floor where they take people
tied up and well this would be a bit of the
history of where
psychiatry in Spain comes from all of this would be or
rather it would need to be developed
much more but it seemed important to me to
bring it here to this to this talk
because it seems important to me to see where
we come from and also to see how here the
anti-psychiatric movement the truth is that
the  anti-psychiatry movement
couldn't develop too much it's
true that there are certain figures like
Guillermo Rendueles González Duro Manuel
Deviat who participated in what was
the psychiatric reform but that
psychiatric reform was a bit also
changing names for spaces because the
people who have been admitted for decades for
example in Cemp Pozuelos that psychiatric reform was of little use to them
then I'm going to talk about the
medical model so briefly I don't know I'll
see of time and the biomedical model This
is the table that
is a table that
explains the
different editions of the DSM of the
statistical analysis and diagnosis manual
from the first edition in
1952 which had 128 disorders until the
last one which is the one from 2013 which had 541
no that this is a good example of how
the American Psychiatric Association
has been generating and multiplying all
the diagnoses and has been monopolizing
more and more the living conditions and
even the circumstances
of life as they have been pathologizing them
in diagnoses and making a profit
since each disorder in the end
implies some  medication medications
when it is then at the moment of truth
in what are
psychiatric medications there are five principles
that would be what are amphetamines that are
usually given to children in
attention deficit
hyperactivity disorders what would be vence cinas
that are not anxiolytics what
antidepressants eh then the branch of
mood stabilizers
and I'm missing one Ah of course the an and
the neuroleptics no but let's go that those
are the five principles But all
psychiatric people have given us in
fact we have tried most of
the psychiatric medications because they
try one on you then they try another then they
try another and reality there is no
scientific basis in all this nor are there any it
is not like when you have a
physical illness that you know that they
can take an x-ray and it can be seen
in this it is not seen and it is part of all this
marketing to put it one way This
is the result of Spain being the
number one country in Consumption of anxiolytics
which is what I mentioned before that
were the vci  you guess this is a
real outrage that I suppose
has a lot to do with the
biomedical model but here what
many say is because there is a lack of psychologists but
the reality is that here there has been a lot of
culture of medication and a lot of culture
especially from primary care
primary care doctors who have
prescribed many vcid pinas to
cover up what are once again the
consequences of the
material conditions of life of
labor exploitation of the prices of the flats the
continuous crises etcetera no I mean
the population has been medicated and medicated
and without that it is not that because there is we do not
know if really if there were more
psychiatrists the situation would be different
and then These are some graphs from the
drug agency on the consumption
of psychotropic drugs in Spain and
we see nothing well they are on the rise too and Oh
okay And then that would be about the
biomedical model let's see well I was going to read
some data before on the state of the
situation of Mental Health in the
Spanish state that this data comes from
the World Health Organization and the
National Health System here of
the Spanish State one in  four
people suffer or will suffer from a
Mental Health problem throughout their lives
77% of suicides have occurred in
low- and middle-income countries
since 2020 Spain is ranked as the fifth
European country with the most poverty suicide
is the second cause of death among
people aged 15 to 29 in 2021
suicide attempts and self-harm
increased by 250% among the
young population of Spain in 2022 Spain leads
the consumption of psychotropic drugs in Europe
well and then we see that in the world
also medicated people
die prematurely as much
as 20 years earlier due to
iatrogenesis the negative physical alterations
produced by
drugs people with
Mental Health problems are a social group in a
vulnerable situation that often
suffers serious violations of their
human rights discrimination and
stigmatization and and Well then to say
that for example in the Spanish state what
would be the involuntary admission there is
a sentence that calls it
unconstitutional but even so it continues it
continues to be carried out and now it is valid on
the invisibility of  the violence is
very difficult in fact I think that the
most difficult thing for us as a
collective of activism in Mental Health
is the impossibility of being able to prove
the psychiatric violence that occurs
because there is no record of any kind, not
even of
involuntary admissions. There is none. Of course,
when they admit you, they take your information from your mobile phone, which means there are
no photos, no videos,
there are very few graphic documents and it is
almost impossible to know about what
really happens in Mental Health wards.
In fact, many people think
that electroshocks are no longer given,
electroshocks are given and they are given to girls and
boys, they are given, girls and boys are tied to the bed, and
adults are admitted
voluntarily and we have no record
of any of this. Later I will put
some slides on the record
of restraints that our
colleagues from the
Mejorana collective in Navarre managed to make and that are being
recorded every year but in the
rest of the State they are not being recorded,
which means there is no evidence. Beyond
what would be the report of the rapporteur of
the UN of 2017 in general there is no evidence
that this is happening and many
times when psychiatric people
eh are ill Or increasingly eh In the end they
end up in long-stay medium-term centers
or whatever, most
of the time it is because they do not have any type
of network, neither family nor friends nor
material conditions that can
support them and on the other hand it is always said
that it is the illness itself that causes
the person to deteriorate instead
of saying that it is the drugs themselves that
cause that type of
deterioration in fact an example for
example that I find mind-blowing is
that there is a type of antipsychotic
neuroleptic that causes you to
roll your eyes upwards okay, I
mean there are people who experience that who
start to look upwards and it is the
typical image of a person who is
crazy and that is produced by the
medication itself that seems
quite clear to me of how this whole
system works so I am going to talk about when
the cases of when Yes there is visibility
of the cases and how it is manipulated and
that although there is visibility in the
media even  It comes to
television, it is of no use to
the person who receives it, nor to other
people, nor to change any type of
legislation or
anything. The first case I'm going to talk about
is the case of Ivan. Ivan is a kid
about 30 years old who last year. Well, this
year at the beginning of this year, they
gave him electroshocks. At first, he signed
that he wanted them to give it to him. I think it
was like that because many times they also
confuse you because, for example, if you
want to be discharged and to leave the hospital right away, they
tell you Yes, plus the consent for
electroshock,
electroconvulsive therapy, you can leave. No,
then it's like what is a
lifelong blackmail. So I think
that at first, he signed
and then the family and he himself said
no, that he didn't want to be given
electroshocks. Well, the doctors went
ahead and what was also very, very
significant about this case is
that despite the fact that it was on a lot of
television, that it was in the press, that it
was a pretty famous case.
Even Ivan's father went on a
hunger strike, the doctors
continued until  the end with the with the
electroconvulsive therapy and they gave him
all the sessions
that they considered that they should
give it to him because when the family said they did
n't want it and it was done
like more pressure that also shouldn't
be the family should be the
person themselves who said no I mean who
could decide if they want it or not a
judge decided that yes it should be given and the
doctors didn't want to they didn't want to give in
and it was a kind of power struggle
in which in the end they gave him the shocks
and in fact there are some there are some
headlines that are the truth eh tremendous
in which it says for example the one that
is here that says the family of the young man
subjected to electroshock in which he in
the hospital without consent asks for
justice is not who he was no that is what
the survivors of electroconvulsive therapy usually say which is that
once they have
given you the electroshocks the
loss of memory How are you in the days
after that they destroy you and that you
really are never the same again is
a practice that no that should not be
given in any way and that  Here it continues to be
given and it is still defended in fact
during Ivan's case there were also
many articles defending
electroshock even talking about the
black legend of electroshock not an
absolutely tremendous thing let's see I'm going to
put this that is
worth it
And and justice was not done obviously he received the electroshocks and no and there he stayed despite all the visibility and all the fight of his own family and other groups who were also there a companion who is no longer there called biso who participated a lot in the
Tolo pride in the fight in this fight of
Ivan's case the next case is the case of
Andreas Andreas was killed after being
tied up for 75 hours in the
psychiatric unit of Asturias and here his
sister Aitana who has also been very very
very close to the
movements and the groups of
crazy activism tried well they collected
65 entities supported the family to
try to take him they took him They
dismissed the case and then they took it
to the constitutional and now I think they
are taking it to Europe in this case it
is also tremendous because  Andreas when she
arrived at the hospital and I think she had well she
would have hallucinations or
whatever and they admitted her and she really had
meningitis they kept her
tied up for 75 hours until they killed her and they
did that because she had a mother
diagnosed with schizophrenia
so they assumed that Andreas
had schizophrenia because her mother
had schizophrenia and they killed her
and this case also well
justice has not been done it has been one of the most
visible and it has been one of the most
visible to also talk about everything that
restraints are because apart
from being tied to the bed which is still
defended today because of the
danger that the person can have,
that the person is in danger to
themselves or to others, the
consequences of being tied up apart from the fact
that it is an absolutely
traumatic experience and that it is considered torture
by the UN also obviously ends up
killing people and this practice we must
remember that it is also done in
senior centers it is done a lot here in
Spain with the excuse that
the senior is going to fall and such And then  they tie it
up which seems to me an absolute perversity
in juvenile centers in
foreign training centers and in
prisons and here we have the record of
restraints which is tying us to the
bed once to us on the
social networks of crazy pride a
psychiatrist told us that you didn't say tie to
the bed that it was very pejorative that we
had to say mechanical restraint
no So that we can see Now how it is let's go
the perversion of perversion And this is the
data from the
restraint record that thanks to the fact that the
colleagues from the Mejorana association
fought for it at the time I think this was
in 2017 when
the change governments began a bit and such with
the collaboration of Podemos, United
We Can, whatever it was at that time in
La Rioja, from the left-wing parties, they
managed to at least get the
record, no, this is not there, we don't
have it in the rest of the State, only
Navarrese So this is the record
of people who have been
tied up from 2018 to 2022
then the number the evolution  Regarding
restraints, they normally say that if there is
a record, they tend to be more cautious
when tying people up, but come on, that's
not true, and at least you can
report it once you get out because the
problem is that if they tie you up in an admission
and then you wanted to report that they tied you up, you don't, you don't
have a way
of proving that they tied you up, that's
also why this
record is important. Here we have the number of
patients who have had some
episode of
restraint, then the breakdown by gender is that
men are usually tied up more than women, I suppose
also because of the issue of who
considers it more aggressive, less aggressive or
whatever. And then they also talk about the fact that
many times they might not tie you up, but
what they do is they inject you with a
strong painkiller or a
strong avenzo or a tranquilizer. And
that is chemical restraint. Likewise, just as
in admission, when
you are inside the admission, they give you
medication, I mean, they tell you no, when they
give you the medication, if you don't want to
take it, they tell you we're going to have problems. And
when they say we're going to have problems.  is
that they are going to tie you up basically then
the medication that's why we say that the
medication is forced that is another
thing that many people also don't know
so this is the it's by gender the
average age of the
patients the average by sex I don't know very
well my colleagues from better Ana gave it to me
but I don't know what I did but
well
And this is
uh more than three restraints in each
admission Because also Of course if they tie you up
once you are more likely to be
tied up more times and during or what
is during the entire admission then the type
of restraint
that this is quite the type of
restraint is quite horrible because it
depends on the parts of the body in which they
tie you so well
And that is the the average of Oh the
duration
of each
restraint
and well it seems terrible to me that they have
taken into account
continuous nocturnal modality no but
normally when they tie you up they also
feed you and such And they usually keep you the
average is one day two days or for example
like the case of Andreas no that 72 hours
until they killed her and then This is the
proof that in the  Spanish: The Spanish state
ties up girls and boys, which is that in
psychiatry, patients under 18 years of age
who will be Well, adolescents
too, but also children and
again the type of
containment and
and here again, the thing about the, the duration
of containment in minors, well, it's
an absolute outrage to have them tied up, I
mean, what society do we live in where they are
tied up, where we tie up our children, no, I
mean, I believe and Well then, in what is
the additional information, well, the same as
always, we do not continue working on
improving the quality of care and on and on
the adequacy of income, which is, it
's good, well, Terrible and nothing And
then
continuing with what is the, I mean, what
is the evidence on
psychiatric violence, we in
2020 when during the pandemic when we
were locked up in the pandemic, uh, it
arrived, they sent us some, some
kids who were adolescents from Ciudad
Real, they made a complaint with some
with their own testimonies on
a specific floor in Ciudad Real, those
testimonies, I think that they can be searched for, they are
called coming out worse than  It comes out you
can find in first vowel which
is a page that I recommend as an
archive that has an archive of everything that
is activism and materials on
clinical Mental Health or in other words
clinical criticism my goodness and well
and when they sent it to us, we
from Pride Crazy Madrid put it on social
networks and when we put it on social networks
on Instagram and Twitter we started to
receive a lot of testimonies
so we have those testimonies
compiled in a blog
called what we have on the screen
which is Pride Crazy states there are more than
60 testimonies about
psychiatric violence and we
also have pending at some point to be able to compile
more and at some point that we also
talked about with Enrique the possibility
of being able to make this more public also to
comment that groups like Insania from
Barcelona and colleagues from Catalonia
also made a compilation of
video testimonies that
can also be consulted so I
wanted to read a few of the
testimonies eh They are very hard but they are I
think they have an
invaluable value because it is the little
evidence that we have on
psychiatric violence and more from the
experience in  first
person testimony one they pushed me by
force into the room and locked me
there testimony two a nurse told me
that the crazy patient is your enemy
testimony TR How to recover from
psychological suffering in the face of such torture
testimony four I don't know what they gave me or
injected me that my heart stopped
testimony five I was tied up until the
next day begging to be
released testimony I know the only thing we
did there was stay locked in the
room testimony 80 what they
did to my friend was kill her alive
testimony 24 then I started screaming
and for more than a day testimony 23
I was only 10 years old they admitted me after
a false diagnosis of bulimia that my
mother tried to deny and they wouldn't let her
testimony 22 and the psychiatrist with all
his face tells me that I should be glad that they
are harassing me testimony 21 he
left my room and locked me in
another one that he called the cloud and he filled me up with
pills I think this is the Gregorio
Marañón thing about the cloud and then also
something that I have forgotten to say
is that  Also based on the
testimonies and all that, something that we
already knew but we have proof
of, is the amount of
sexual abuse that is committed within the
Mental Health system and that goes
absolutely unpunished because our
own diagnoses delegitimize us, no. In
other words, at the moment in which you go
to report that maybe eh They are
weighing you not because you have an
eating disorder and they start groping you, you ca
n't say anything because you're crazy
etcetera etcetera no. So since this
also happens every day testimony
57 when I reported sexual abuse to a
colleague, the nursing assistants
tied me to the bed for two days testimony
16 They gave me electroshock, they tied me up, they
drugged me, they mistreated me, they
left me purple and I was just
red with pain testimony 58 because of
so much restraint Now when I
get nervous, no one can touch me
because my body relates it to that and
I totally lose control Not even my mother
can hug me when I go into
crisis testimony nue I found myself tied
to a bed and completely drugged
testimony 10  I witnessed sexual abuse by
a psychiatrist of a patient who was
tied up and sedated testimony 11 I was
deeply traumatized by my stay there and I am
terrified of hospitals since then they
wanted to keep me quiet and they succeeded now
as much as it hurts me I do not externalize
all this pain that I feel testimony 33 they did
not let us drink water more than a
glass at each meal testimony 32 nobody
realizes that I am there watching
how they tie my sister up between eight
people testimony 19 the woman was
put in isolation tied up and without
contact with the other companions
testimony 18 I felt that it was useless
to resist but the place was full of
patients who did it and the only thing they
did was tie them up and well then I
recommend Although it is very hard to
read the testimonies and I also
launch here the proposal that at some
point we can collect more between
various groups and also be able to
publish them at some point or or or
give them all the voice that we can give them
not beyond the little that reaches
our blog of crazy pride
denounces and now to finish
well I have gone a bit too far  I'm going to
talk about what the
crazy pride movement is, which I suppose has already
been talked about throughout all the
sessions, but well, let's talk a little about
what history has been like here in the
Spanish state, well, there were
movements that started before
and
since the 15M,
groups like Flipas en Primera
Persona were formed and also associations like
Activam and then in 2000 in Asturias
the first crazy pride was celebrated, I think it
was around
2000, I don't remember well but it was years
before it was celebrated throughout the
state, which was in 2018 in Madrid. We
did it for the first time. Hi, a
rally in Plaza de España in
front of, that is, where Don
Quixote is, we held a rally of
about 200 people demanding an end
to the violation of human rights in
the Mental Health system and for another
conception of madness. In
2019, we held another rally in
Atocha and in 2020, which is also true,
the pandemic had
quite a bit of force there when it came to
the  people become more aware of what
Mental Health was like and that maybe it
wasn't a good idea to be locked up
when you're feeling unwell. There were quite a few people.
We held our first demonstration in
2021. We held another one in 2022 and the one in the
photo is from 2023. If you're
curious about Pride Mad Madrid, I
recommend that you follow our blog
called Pride Mad Madrid. And
our social media. Or if you're
in Madrid, come by and
welcome us.
Then this is about talking about
other groups in the Spanish state.
In the photo,
Zoroa's colleagues from
Bilbao appear. And
then in Barcelona we have the
colleagues from Insania, who are the
most first-person groups of
survivors and psychiatric patients and
fighters for everything I'm
telling you. And then to finish, and to
give way to Edel, this is one of
us from the Pride with
Madrid collective. In critical pride, no, and to
talk about the importance and how.
We will always be united for the
depathologization
of everything that is qui but also for the
depathologization of everything else and now I'll
give it a go Thank you very much
thank you very much Fatima Ju I really
loved it Well I'm
loving everything the whole conference is
super powerful eh the part of the
testimonies has left me a little touched
But well or rather it's normal
eh I'm going to share to see if I can How is
this done
[Music]
window can be seen I don't see you now
but
well the presentation can be seen
Yeah okay eh
Well I think there is
a lot of connection in all of this eh Also understanding the
issue of the dissidence of
trans people in relation to the pathologization they
suffer and well I don't know if you have
found out But less than a week ago
Ayuso again proposed repealing the
law that had been passed in Madrid
eh the LGBTI law aims to remove
important points that would mean going back to the
pathologization that we trans people had,
going back to not prohibiting conversion therapies
and and what we talked about language also
not the importance of how for
example in the case  of the law aims to
remove everything that is social
eh And to modify words like
trans people to talk about the
transsexual condition again with this attempt to biomicize
our experience again
isolating it from the social and the
political no I also liked what
the
companions said before of Well the
euphemisms no also of these
biopsychosocial perspectives
that It's good that although there is still a lot to do in
that sense because we are still in an
absolute psychiatrization in also taking
into account how the bio is placed
first the pico would come after and the
social I think it would practically be
forgotten no and in that sense it seems that
I would also like to rescue the
political more than more than that no eh And it is
in the sense in which I want I want to
talk about the trans from the
political side Well I am going to present a
little bit of what is the more theoretical part of
my thesis project that is going to be
based above all on testimonies in
life stories but but well I want to
Sira a little to start a
debate or to be able to reflect on
these
issues and I am going to start with an
extract from the manifesto of the campaign
of  est pathologization of 2012 which was a
bit like the beginning of this whole fight
for the depathologization of
trans identities in the Spanish state and
in this case in Barcelona and says
trans activists from all over the world from
different continents and cities are taking to the
streets again to
demand trans depathologization under
the slogan trans identities are not a
disease we denounce that even today in the
21st century trans transsexual
transgender and transvestite identities
are still present as
gender incongruence or transvestism disorder in the
recently published draft of the dsm5
we demand the decataloging of
gender identity disorders from the
international catalogs of
diseases DSM c and we fight for the
right to decide autonomously over
our own bodies the discourse of
pathologization has collapsed
we have torn it down by denouncing
these therapies year after year there are no
more excuses and there are ideas that
can no longer be defended Well this is the
part of the manifesto that was made in 201
and that began to  have more boom in 2012
and as we see in this place in the end
what I want to make clear is that
even if there are legislative reforms and
even if we gradually manage to
depathologize sexual dissidence there
will always be a tension
between the people who are at the bottom and
the power not in this case a resistance
with medical legal institutions and
that also have to do eh Well with a
whole network of power is not good
to talk a little about this
transsexual condition that Yuso wants to rescue
because eh the origin of this
transsexual condition or transsexuality comes
from the medical and
legal construction not from our experience eh if we
think of a milestone of how
this definition began eh well we can go back
to
1966 with Harry Benjamin and his book
the transsexual phenomenon eh well in this
book although these issues were already being discussed
debated within the scientific community,
experiments were also carried out with populations with
sexual dissidence not always as
subjects of experimentation
em also to reinforce what we
understand now by the difference
sexual has it been necessary to do these
experiments
um Well uh Harry Benjamin what he
proposes is that a
therapy uh a hormonal and surgical in
the case of trans people is
mandatory no that is the difference and what he
proposes is the term of
transsexual process no that would be like Well that uh
linear way of understanding uh what is
conceived as a sex change and that
is totally uh validated or
intervened by professionals does not
have to have on the one hand a
psychotherapy on the other hand the
endocrine treatment and on the other hand
the surgeries not to accommodate how to
that change uh what we see with this is
that in the end the whole definition of the
experience of the transition of
people or those who question their gender
is totally and nominalized or yes or
colonized so to speak by the by the
intervention or by the
scientific community this on the one hand invalidates
other life stories or other ways
of understanding the transitions
and at the same time establishes a single
way No and that way has to be
validated by them not to say in the
case that they think that no well it can
give rise to what we see
conversion therapies denial of identity and in
this sense trans people in the
end since their origin well eh with
this term of transsexuality what they have
had is a control of both their
body and their mind, not of
their entire identity eh from a
medical and also legal point of view, no, it is
related. Well,
this photo is from a
recent neuropsychiatry journal that I
wanted to take from these articles that I
am not a big fan of but I
like to see in what terms they speak and
well, what we see in this sense is
that they themselves are recognizing that
there are some differences, in other words, there is
a change in nominalizations that eh in
this case comes precisely from the
trans activism that is fighting for
this
decataloging, they always try to
put us or pigeonhole us in some
way Where we fit in. In that sense, they do
not need to give us a
name. This model, which as has also been
mentioned in other interventions,
comes from the DSM and the ICD, is a way of
understanding human behavior from
a biomedical point of view above all. It
is not a biomedical ia of
experience  human that as
Fatima has taught is increasing over
the years And that manual is growing as
long as there are behaviors that were not previously
considered a pathology and are
beginning to be considered in the case of
sexuality because from the very
beginning it has been
involved here not on the one hand
homosexuality on the other hand what was
understood by transvestism transsexualism
as sexual perversions that
also allowed the creation of what we understand by
heterosexuality not as opposition And
well, all of this also comes from a
model eh that especially began to have
boom with Emil Celin who is a
German psychiatrist and that well, it gave rise as
critical medical anthropologists suggest
to the cyano model which is right now the one that is
most valid and the one with the most eh
legitimacy So to speak and
has
well eh I'm going to say a phrase like that of
antipsychiatry
in experience Well here I wanted to
highlight the term experience
precisely because it is what is
subject and and held by these
institutions and that at the same time it
is not that it is not that it is a truth, I
mean because in the end what
these diagnoses these classifications intend
is to distance it from the whole social part of
the whole political or historical part eh of
what we understand by experience eh
by introducing it in a biomedical
biological language, in the end it is very difficult
to move Because if you naturalize
certain behaviors or
definitions
eh they acquire a character of truth that
becomes a narrative not in this
sense
and Well, I would also like to highlight how this
change that has occurred from the
criminalization to the pathologization of
sexual deviation, which as we see has
been progressive since the 20th century.
Previously, for example, in the
Franco era, what was more typical,
especially at the beginning, was a
criminalization or an incarceration of
sexual dissidents eh, especially
in the case of cis men and
trans women. In the case of trans men,
this invisibility was probably maintained,
and in the case of
lesbian women, it was denied that they
had a sexuality and normally, in
any case, they were more taken to that
pathology, no, or to
mental asylums. But progressively, all of
these dissidents have gone in the
way they have been understood, is
from  a pathologization, no, well, here it is worth
highlighting, as Fatima highlighted before,
to the psychiatrist Lopez Ibor, no, that it would be
like a bit of a breaking point with this
more criminalizing discourse and the law
of vagrants and criminals in step with the law
of social rehabilitation, no, well, for
a way of developing
conversion therapies for
sexually dissident people, uh, well,
another phrase, which in this case is
from Howard Becker, from the sociology of
deviation, uh, says, when a
deviant is caught, they are treated
according to the popular diagnosis that
explains why they are and what they are like, and the
treatment itself can in turn
deepen their deviation. Well, in this
case I wanted to talk about
sexual deviation because, beyond euphemisms,
what is understood by deviation
is the origin of all of these, of all this
that is happening, uh, that comes from
psychiatry and its origin, of
understanding sexuality, uh, what
the sociology of deviation allows
is precisely to denaturalize this
de-
biologizing discourse. uh, well, for example,
even the  Junkies, no, they were treated. Well,
that's like,
um, like sick people, like deviants. In
this case, they didn't consume drugs, no,
which also carries a whole
associated stigma. Well, all these
deviations, uh, what this
sociology proposes is precisely to see
how what we understand
as normal is constructed and what we consider, uh, not
normal, no, or abnormal. Well, in my thesis,
what I wanted to highlight was above all the
question of subjectivity, and based
above all on that more
social, more relational point of view, of understanding that it
is not an internal question, as
certain uh psychologies would propose. Not that it would be
like this idea that we are
isolated individuals or that we are
subjects and
individual, but also not to fall into that
sociology itself that ignores
individual experiences or the
subjective experiences of certain
subjects, no, but always seeing it with this
relational tension, in this sense,
understanding the subject as a
subject that relates to other
agents and relates to other
instances that constantly
configure them. Well, in this case, uh, what I
want to highlight are instances that in
subjectivity, trams are very present.
eh As they are beyond others not like
any person but what I consider
important is the medical legal field
as I have raised the family field that
no I am not going to get into now but but that
would also be an important
turning point and the activist field and at the
center of all this would be the
sexogender gender system and cisnormativity no and
well in the end understanding this no that no that it is not that
eh the trans person eh
possesses an identity or as it is raised
from birth Although in the end it is a
discourse that is used to legitimize
legitimize us from activism so
that this right has not been taken away as
also or happened with the case of gays
and and lesbians No that in the end they
had to raise that they were born
that way to well to bring it back to the
plane of nature no and that and that it would not
lose legitimacy But well in this
sense I want to highlight this
social part because I consider it important
that behind everything there is a sexog
gender system that turns us into a minority and
turns us into dissidents no eh In
this case there is the sexog gender system and
the biopolitics of  sexual identity eh
what actors
like batler or Preciado are proposing precisely eh is to question
what we understand by sexual
and gender identity not in its entirety what they are
proposing is how all of this is
configured from language and and
the way in which there is a system that
or rather that sees us coerces us eh
with respect to our subjectivity no and
our bodily experience in this
case with repetitive and
performative acts that are presented well coercing
as is the case of what we understand
as man or woman and behind all of it
heterosexuality
eem Well to understand a little what they would
propose is that both gender, that
is to say the roles and the expressions
but also sex and everything that we
understand by the corporal and the
naturalized are part of the social
not those traits that we understand as
male or female in the end are
configured eh socially Well
because they end up being read like that no
but no they are not Well I know the case
of the bodies of the voices of the
General Well everything that we understand by
natural is not them  genitals etcetera well
for reading a phrase from pol preciado that
when he raises the contrasexual contract
precisely that contract more of the
dissidents says the bodies
recognize themselves not as men or
women but as speaking bodies and they
recognize the others as
speaking bodies before they recognize themselves
the possibility of accessing all the
significant practices and thus
all the positions of enunciation as
subjects that history has
determined as masculine feminine or
perverse well in this case how to
highlight this vision More queer or more
dissident of what it means to step out of the
heterosexual norm and what it means to step out
of the sex or gender system that in the end eh
if we recover that Social part is what would
be in the oppression of
trans people not so much that they have
a transsexual condition or that eh because they were
born that way or because they have a
malformation or a genetic defect as
all these more biological theories propose, well they are
this no
eem Well in another case there would be this
medical legal field as I proposed of the
experience of transitioning and that and
well there have been some changes eh that
now we are going to go back because,
well, this thing about getting the laws
is a step back and a step forward,
eh, what was proposed was to remove the
transsexual, transsexuality as a
pathology, which in this case is the
identity, but a
certain behavior is still associated with discomfort, which
in this case would be gender dysphoria,
no. That is, the feeling of wanting to
transition instead of thinking from
desire or from questioning everything,
to this entire sex, gender, or
sexual identity system, what would be understood is
that it is an internal, yes, ecological discomfort
that certain people have because
their mind does not fit with their body, no. Well,
once again, like recovering
this idea of ​​the body as natural or that or that we
have a given sex, eh, no,
precisely highlighting this is that in
the manual written in English,
the word gender incongruence appears and
in the translation into Spanish, gender is changed to
sex because, well, in
biomedical language, by associating this with what is
natural, it also allows for a
sociological des of the entire discourse and to label it
in a more objective and more neutral way,
no, but well, in that sense, we see how
language also configures  the
reality
and well behind all of this eh what I
understand is that there is a
disciplinary device as Foucault would say
that it would be a technology of
government with which it is intended to create
the subjective conditions to govern
a group of people and these
devices well they have eh articulate
both exercises of power and objectification
in this case formation of
specific knowledge. Well, it is the expertise
that speaks about identity and on the
other hand, modes of subjectivation that
would be these processes of
pathologization or psychiatrization of
people who transit.
Well, what I understand here is that there
is like a biopolitical colonization of
trans subjectivity and that beyond there
being legislative changes eh
always in the relationship between the
doctor and the patient, these relationships can occur
or will occur and continue to occur,
eh, well, as a
colonization, no, or yes, more than more than
colonization. Well,
of how to eliminate an experience to
translate it into a biomedical language and
also control eh who can and who
cannot eh make eh decisions about
their identity  Well, for example, there would be
this diagnosis of gender dysphoria,
which would have to be possessed in order to
acquire more credibility. Then there would be
the real-life T, which is well known, but is
used less but is still used, which would be like
psychiatrists
asking the person if they feel
uh man or woman and if they have had
behaviors in their childhood that are
related to tastes, for example,
if they liked it as a child, yes, they
feel like a woman, as the princesses would pose
in the case of trans boys. Well,
if they liked soccer since they were
little, or in other words, issues that also
reinforce the sex or gender system a little bit,
no, and they label it as uh
a decision, that is, choices
that probably no person would
pass that test, no, but in the case
of trans people, it is imposed on them in
order to be able to transition. And then there would
be the Minnesota test inventory,
which would be that way of
ruling out uh the existence of other
pathologies, other disorders that, as we
see, here people who have been
psychiatrically diagnosed or who have received another
type of diagnosis still lose
much more credibility, and and and and they have
that goes through double double double
control not in this sense for that
connection also between What
psychiatrization or madness implies with this
pathologization of dissidence, that is to say, it
will always be United even if
one thinks otherwise,
and well And finally, the activist sphere,
which would be, above all, to rescue this,
this beginning of the campaign of this
pathologization, well, to see how, uh, what it
allows is other ways of constructing the
experience, other ways of
actively and collectively reflecting on what, on
what people desire, uh,
and that also allows us to generate other
worlds, that is to say, other other ways
of inhabiting, uh, the trans experience,
for example, the use of, well, the talks,
the debates, the demonstrations, in other words,
politicizing all of this allows us, little by little, to get
out of that medical guardianship and
psychiatric guardianship, but also other
types of professional guardianship.
Well, to finish with this
construction of
political subjectivity, Aier highlighted that he is
also a very good author, but it seems a
bit like this idea that the political is
what oppresses us, or as he would say, well,
all that which the institutions of
power  that subject us and I would say In what
way can those people who have been
subjected uh carry out
emancipatory processes no e Well well
then to highlight a phrase that he uses which is that there is
no politics Simply because
the poor put themselves before the rich first of
all it must be said that politics is the
interruption of the mere effects of the
domination of the rich which makes
the poor exist as an entity well
with this what he means is that the
poor or what we understand as poor It
is not that they exist because nature has
made them that way or because well not all
these theories that could be raised uh
that in the case of the poor it sounds strange
no but in the case of for example
homosexuals trans or or crazy people in general
well uh it is conceived as something natural or
that or that it is that they are like that since they were
born and it is something biological no
what precisely makes them exist in
this sense is that they are
political subjects no In other words naming ourselves from
the crazy from the trans in this case is
precisely to uh politicize It is not to
say to stop believing that it is something
naturalized or in other words by naturalizing what is
also
Political depoliticization, with respect
to our experience, allows us to
establish that, that struggle not with, with
these institutions, but
probably what happens is that they are
assimilated, not as can happen in
the LGBT movement, like other struggles.
And in this case, what
Ranier proposes is that on the one
hand there would be that police that would be the control, uh,
the hierarchical distribution of functions.
Well, everything that is the order of the
social or what we understand as the
naturalized order of the world or as it is, and
then there would be politics, which would be
those struggles, uh, that precisely
denaturalize not that distribution and
denaturalize what we consider
natural, that is to say, in this case,
uh, we have to have a certain place,
trans people have to have a
certain place, people who have been
psychiatrically ill, and that cannot be
changed. Well, in this sense, how to
maintain that tension
of displacing that power and opening up
other ways of understanding the
human experience. uh. Well,
ending with all this, uh,
many questions, many reflections have already come up.
But, well, I wanted to bring up
what it means in this case to be
political subjects in the  case of madness And of
sexual dissidence and to rescue this
feminist phrase that says the personal is
political and in this case it is clear
No because in the end the personal even
the most internal possible that can be
understood by the personal has been
subjected to the very subjectivity of
trans people of dissidence but
also of those of crazy or
psychiatric people is that they have been
totally they have lost the agency to be
able to name their own experience no I
mean because it has been defined by other
instances So in this sense what does it
imply to turn it around and what does it imply to
politicize it And well, I would
be I don't know how long I've been because I can't
see the screen but let's
see there are
7 minutes left you've gone too far
perfect well it
depends on the rules there are those who
ask you to
go to the end to the bottom Well
no, I have nothing else left to say if you
pull the thread maybe
things come out I don't know
if let's
see
Sara up to
where I've
become too theoretical already a
bit changing the ch because I didn't know
well how it was going to be but well I hope it has
been understood And it has gone to
less I take this opportunity to thank
Lidia crazy pride
Fatima
everyone, well,
thank you very much for making this
congress so interesting. The truth is that it has
been very
powerful. It is
also necessary that we keep quiet about words because they are
too harsh or they are not, it is a bone,
a Cox, that hurts if it is done badly. I hope that
things are done really well,
eh. If, if, there is no, you can. Just go ahead, it will be
lovely. I apologize. I will try to
change the captions that appear in
Spanish. I
wanted to ask you, Eder. Taking advantage of the fact
that we have
time, what is the
collective support of the entire group like?
Until recently, the entire
homosexual group, call it what you want, of all
colors and conditions, that crossed the
line, was in the spotlight,
could go through the cloud of the
cashew nut, what support does the group have now?
Fran, with the problem of wanting to
change their,
eh, let's say what they can, of the
organism, of the anatomy,
bones
aside, we know that, well, the
apprentices do not have our species,
what kind of groups are there here that
can say, we are with
you. Well, I think that, Ah, the most
powerful thing there is, well, the
crazy movement.  sexual dissidents and also
racialized people, I mean, I think
that in the end the margins are a little bit not what is
left out of what the
majority means by
social majority, which I think is also the powerful thing
about these discourses that open
cracks and open fractures in
issues that seem like
more, well, more minority, no, and that
probably with those cracks,
what is understood by the
normal reality that we live in is modified, we are like
nuisances, I don't know if you want to say
something Fatima Ah yes, I had a question
but it was a bit of a reflection question
Because as I loved I mean, I
really loved your entire
presentation But when I was left with
a reflection when we talk about that about
naturalizing this is
politicizing how do we do with people from our
own collective because it happens to us
too, or I don't know the people from our
own collective who want That
naturalization is not that I am
sick It is that I am sick and then I
need you to help me I cannot do it I
need this or what I am is
locked in the body of wrong Not
wrong how do we break that that
inertia the
continuous naturalization because  I mean, I experience it a lot
like that happens all the
time, yes, totally, and I think that it is
very difficult to reach a consensus on
this, no, because in the end it is a
way of legitimizing and it is
totally legitimate, in the end it helps
many people to, well, alleviate
inequalities and make their day easier,
so that it is much easier not to have to be
fighting all the time, no,
but of course it also implies
assimilation, and probably new
forms of control. Well, in the case of
trans people, for example, probably
even if there is a depathologization,
eh, we will again be subject to and
subject to a psychologization
or that there is necessarily a
social or psychotherapeutic intervention
on our identity in order to
make our lives more pleasant. So
in that sense, I think that in the end what it
prevents is a break. No, because
everything is taken to the individual
and that collective character is lost, I don't
know if in the case of crazy people,
how do you see it? Well, also the use of
diagnoses. No, for example, the same
in trans people, in the
trans community, that is no longer so accepted. But
well, until recently  little the diagnosis was
a way to be able to enter
no And of course in the end Well, many people
also say Well, I don't care if they
put gender incongruence on the
medical report if they give me hormones
because it's not like I don't care No, I
mean, I want them to give them to me but
well, of course in the end it's also a
way of giving in
No, of course, I mean, I think that above
all it's at the point where you see it
as survival strategies,
not like it could be a pension, like it could be
not giving me hormones,
etc. But the problem is when you
base your identity on that
naturalization at its root. I think that's the
biggest problem and what ends up
politicizing and then I also think that the
abuse of psychologization is
also